‎Nick, thanks so much for being willing
‎to come along
and answer some questions for us.
‎Yes, I’m glad to come.
‎Well, now that we’ve got you here,
the first question I’d like to ask you is,
‎What really are these so-called J-References?
‎Well the “J” in the J-References
‎stands for Jehovah.
‎And this is mainly a list of Bibles
‎in Hebrew and other languages
‎that use the divine name, Jehovah,
‎in the main text
of the Christian Greek Scriptures
‎—or at least some form
of the name Jehovah.
‎And this list began to be compiled
‎by the New World Bible Translation Committee
‎in the 1940’s.
‎So where would we find a list like that now?
‎Well, originally there was
a list of 21 such references
‎in the 1950 edition
of the Christian Greek Scriptures.
‎Then, in 1984,
‎27 such references were included
‎in the Reference Bible in English.
‎And since that time,
many more J-References have been found,
‎and now the list includes
‎over 90 such translations and reference works.
‎And you can find an up-to-date list
‎in Appendix C4 of the [Study] Bible.
‎Very good.
‎So I guess the main question
we’re interested in asking you is,
‎Do these J-References prove in themselves
‎that the Tetragrammaton should be
in the Christian Greek Scriptures?
‎Actually, no; they don’t.
‎Ah, now, I’m sure most of us
weren’t expecting you to say that.
‎So can you explain it a little bit more please?
‎Well,
the New World Translation Committee
‎did not rely on the J-References
as the basis for their decision
‎to restore the divine name
in the Christian Greek Scriptures.
‎You already discussed
the basis for the decision
‎earlier in the broadcast.
‎Rather,
these J-References provide proof
‎that other translators
have made similar decisions
‎when restoring the divine name
‎to their editions
of the Christian Greek Scriptures,
‎or the so-called New Testament.
‎So, now that you’re talking
about these other Bible translators,
‎could you give us an example
of who you’re talking about?
‎Well, a number of them
were well-known Bible scholars.
‎For example, 19th-century
Lutheran theologian Franz Delitzsch
‎is still considered to be
a foremost Bible scholar
‎and a scholar of Biblical Hebrew.
‎Delitzsch’s translation
‎of the New Testament in Hebrew
was produced in 1877,
‎and it’s one of the J-References.
‎In fact, it’s still one
of the best-known New Testaments
‎in the Hebrew language.
‎In that translation,
he discerned when to use Jehovah’s name
‎in places where the Greek text
‎contains the term Kyʹri·os, or Lord.
‎The New World Bible Translation Committee
‎studied all those occurrences
from his translation
‎as well as the occurrences
in others of the J-References.
‎So how would you summarize
what the value is of these J-References?
‎Well, all the J-References,
‎including the new ones in the Study Bible,
‎represent the view
of translators and scholars
‎who arrived at the same conclusion
‎that the New World
Bible Translation Committee did,
‎namely, that Jesus Christ and the apostles
‎used the name Jehovah
in their teaching and in their writings.
‎And this conclusion is reflected
‎in their translation and reference works.
‎Very interesting.
That’s fascinating.
‎So if I’ve got it right then,
‎what you’re saying is
that if we go to Appendix C, in C3,
‎there we’ve got a list of the reasons
‎why the brothers
on the New World Translation Committee
‎decided to put
Jehovah’s name in certain verses.
‎And then C4 is virtually
‎a list of other Bible translations
‎where the translators
made exactly the same decision.
‎Is that right?
‎That’s exactly right.
‎Ah, that’s good.
‎Well, thank you very much, Nick,
for coming along.
‎We really appreciated hearing
those expressions from you.
‎Before you go, though,
can we ask you, please,
‎Can you take back the love and greetings
and an expression of appreciation
‎to all those hardworking brothers and sisters
there in Translation Services?
‎Yes, I’d be happy to.
‎Thank you very much.